Related_Circus Maximus
https://www.rome.info/attractions/circus-maximus/

The Colosseum may be the most famous arena left over from Ancient Rome, but it wasn’t the largest. The Circus Maximus could hold 5 times as many spectators; though exact numbers aren’t known, estimates range from 150,000 to 350,000 spectators, far exceeding the 50,000 seats at the Colosseum. 

Chariot racing was one of, or arguably the most popular sport in ancient Rome – and was also one of the oldest, as it originated in Ancient Greece. A race typically consisted of seven laps, with four to six competitors. Chariot racing was incredibly dangerous for both the drivers and horses and often led to deaths or serious injuries.

The wide-open field of the arena is often used as an outdoor venue for performances. Concerts and plays are often performed here, in keeping with the Circus Maximus’ longstanding history as a centre for entertainment.

Though the partially remaining structure can be dated back to a similar time to the Colosseum, the Circus Maximus is far older. The origins of the arena date back to six centuries before the Colosseum was built.

Unlike most ancient sites in Rome, the Circus Maximus is free to enter and explore as it is a public park.
Though we rightfully associate the Circus Maximus with its primary purpose of sport and entertainment, it also had religious connections. Shrines and temples overlooked the circuit, and the sun and moon gods, Apollo and Diana, but particularly the former, were considered patrons of the games.

Timeline:

6th century BC. The track of Circus Maximus was carved out for chariot races early on in Rome’s history.

329 BC. Wooden stalls for seating are built, and permanent starting gates are constructed.

50 BC. Due to popular demand, the stadium is expanded to hold more spectators and a larger track.

31 BC. A fire causes significant damage to the arena. Augustus conducted repairs, with the addition of the Ancient Egyptian ‘Flaminian’ obelisk from Heliopolis, which would much later be erected in the Piazza del Popolo, where it stands today.

AD 64. A devastating fire begins in the stalls and shops within the stadium, causing untold damage and quickly spreading throughout the city. The Circus Maximus was rebuilt with a larger capacity the following year.

AD 549. The last official chariot race at the Circus Maximus occurs.

AD 1588. Two Egyptian obelisks are unearthed at the site, one is moved to the Piazza del Popolo, another to the Basilica of St John Lateran.

21st century. Concerts are performed in the arena – the likes of the Rollings Stones and Genesis are two of the more notable examples.

