Greek Architecture: Everything You Need to Know
https://www.architecturaldigest.com/gallery/greek-architecture-101

We have a lot to thank ancient Greece for—the Olympics, Western medicine, democracy, and, of course, Greek architecture. The ancient civilization, which encompassed the mainland, the Greek islands, and other areas along the Mediterranean (from modern-day Slovenia to western Turkey), produced precise and monumental buildings that have influenced thousands of years of architecture. These designs emphasized perfection over innovation, creating simple yet beautiful structures that are still referenced in modern designs. In this guide from AD, learn about the architectural style developed in ancient Greece, study classical orders, and discover some of the most important examples of Greek architecture, from the Acropolis of Athens to a collection of temples in Italy.

What is Greek architecture?
Generally speaking, Greek architecture refers to the ancient buildings designed and developed by the ancient Greek cities and civilizations that existed throughout the Greek mainland, Peloponnese, Aegean Islands, and Greek colonies in Anatolia and Italy. These buildings were constructed as early as 900 BCE all the way until the first century CE, though most of the earliest remaining works from the period date to around 600 BCE. “Ancient Greek architecture is a broad field of study that encompasses everything from monumental stone temples to domestic houses built of timber and mud brick,” says Jessica Paga, PhD, a professor at William & Mary College specializing in Greek archaeology and history.

History of Greek architecture
The legacy of ancient Greece is profound—it was a period of achievement for countless disciplines, including philosophy, politics, art, science, and of course architecture for thousands of years. Because of its notable length, scholars typically divide the era into multiple periods, including the Mycenaean Age (1600 to 1100 BCE), the Greek Dark Age (1200 to 800 BCE), the Greek Archaic period (800 to 479 BCE), the Greek Classical Age (500-336 BCE), and the Hellenistic period (336 to 146 BCE).

Each period brought certain changes and advancements to Greek architecture. During the Greek Dark Ages, collections of farming villages—eventually city-states—started to form, which brought forth the existence of the agora (a marketplace) and central meeting place. The archaic period encompassed some of the more significant architectural contributions, including settlements organized around Greek temples, city centers, and open-air markets. It was also during this time that the Greeks started developing columns, sloped roofs, and porticoes. The Classical Period represented the maturation of Greek design, and welcomed some of the most notable structures of the era including the Parthenon.

What was the Greek style of architecture ?
Greek architecture is considered a part of classical architecture, which also encompasses Roman architecture. The Greek style was defined by its uniformity, simplicity, proportions, and harmony. Many of the most iconic designs from this time include stone edifices, though other materials such as wood and brick were also employed. “Some of the earliest Greek temples were built of mud brick and timber, but they gradually started to be built in stone during the seventh to sixth century BCE, and by the fifth century BCE almost all temples were built in stone,” Dr. Paga explains.

The Greeks built various types of public buildings, including theaters and stadiums, though perhaps the most notable structures were the multiple temples built to honor the Olympic gods. “Greek temples, though, despite how iconic and numerous they seem, were often not a necessary part of Greek worship,” Dr. Paga adds. The most important element for the ancient religion was the altar, which were located outside of the temple since offerings were burnt on them. A temple was mostly necessary if it housed a statue for a cult god. “Temples were also depositories of votives, or gifts, brought to the god as thank-you offerings and to ask for their favor. These objects, especially those made of precious materials like bronze or gold, would be stored inside the temple to protect them,” Dr. Paga explains.

What are the three styles of Greek architecture?
Though an untrained eye may see any ancient Greek building as similar—perhaps a rectangular floor plan with a row of columns along the facade as basic characteristics—there are three distinct styles of Greek architecture known as the classical orders. Each order—the Doric, Ionian, and Corinthian—uses a different style of column, proportions, and decorative details.

“The Doric and Ionic orders, to the best of our knowledge, emerged around the same time that temples began to be built in stone, in the seventh and sixth centuries BCE,” Dr. Paga says. “The Corinthian order, on the other hand, developed later, towards the end of the fifth century BCE.”

Set of six vector illustrations of decorative Greek and Roman style columns and pillars in three styles... doric ionic...
The classical orders from left to right: Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. Photo: J Felton/Getty Images 
The architectural orders are most easily identifiable based on the type of column present and the entablature, which is the superstructure of moldings and bands that lies horizontally across the columns. The entablature can be further subdivided into three parts: the architrave (a lintel or beam that lies on the columns), the frieze (a band along the middle of the entablature often used for decorative purposes), and the cornice (horizontal molding that crowns the building).

Doric
The Doric order is more easily recognizable by simple, unadorned columns that sit directly on the stylobate—the top step of a temple’s platform—without an additional base. “The Doric order is characterized by its thick columns and spreading capital, which looks a bit like a mushroom or a squished marshmallow,” Dr. Paga says. Doric columns are fluted and typically stocky. “Broadly speaking, the Doric order was used mostly in mainland Greece and areas to the west—such as Sicily and Southern Italy—where many Greek cities sent colonies in the eighth to sixth century BCE.”

Ionic
The Ionic order gets its name from the place it originated, Ionia, a coastal region in what is now Turkey. The Ionic order is notable for its graceful proportions, and the buildings often have a slender and graceful profile. Ionic architecture is most easily identifiable by paired volutes on the columns—spiral, scroll-like ornaments—and a base that separates the columns from the stylobate. “The frieze course for the Ionic order is one continuous horizontal band, an area that was sometimes decorated with relief sculpture and sometimes left blank,” Dr. Paga says.

Corinthian
“The Corinthian order began to be favored more and more during the Hellenistic period (the period after the exploits and death of Alexander the Great), and the Romans especially loved it,” Dr. Paga explains. “So if you go to Italy now, you’ll primarily see the Corinthian order, and it is also the order most commonly seen today in Europe and the United States.” The columns of the Corinthian order are among the most ornate and sleek of the classical orders. The most identifiable feature is a decorative capital—the very top of the column—which includes carved acanthus leaves.

What was Greek architecture known for?
“Some of the most intriguing things present in ancient Greek architecture, particularly the temples, are the existence of what scholars often refer to as ‘optical refinements,’” Dr. Paga says. “These were documented and recognized even in antiquity by people like ancient Roman architect Vitruvius, but they still cause some befuddlement today. Two of the most widely used ‘refinements’ are entasis and curvature.”

The Temple of Concord
Temple of Concordia Photo: Atlantide Phototravel/Getty Images
Entasis was mostly frequently used in the Doric order and involved a slight convex or swelling in the middle of the shaft. “Entasis is quite noticeable in earlier temples of the sixth and early fifth century BCE, but it gradually becomes more and more subtle, to the point where you barely notice it or it is only detectable using scientific tools,” Dr. Paga adds. Curvature, on the other hand, refers to a principle by which no straight lines exist in monumental stone Greek architecture. “Every single horizontal element—like the steps, podium, frieze, and cornice—curves slightly upwards in the middle,” Dr. Paga says. “An exaggerated drawing of this would make the entire building look like it’s springing upwards from the middle.” The main vertical elements, like columns, are inclined slightly inward.

Though this may seem counter to the fact that Greek architecture is generally known for its crisp, straight lines, it’s actually these refinements that make this assumption possible. “There was a widespread idea in antiquity that, when presented with a straight horizontal line, the eye sees it as sagging in the middle, hence curvature ‘corrects’ this optical distortion,” Dr. Paga says. “Similarly, they thought that a vertical line was seen to be diminishing in diameter as it stretched upwards, so entasis was thought to help counter this problem.” Modern scholars acknowledge this explanation, while also noting that these refinements enliven the architecture.

Defining elements and characteristics of Greek architecture
To better understand Greek architecture, consider the common architectural elements that are often seen in ancient Greek buildings. Though not exhaustive, consider the following list:

Tall columns
Symmetry
Square or rectangular floor plans
Stone structures
Famous Greek Architecture Examples and Architects
Image may contain Building Architecture Temple Worship Shrine Column Parthenon and Pillar
Photo: Scott E. Barbour/Getty Images
1/5
The Acropolis of Athens
The Acropolis is a fortified complex of buildings—many of which designed to honor the Greek gods—built in the fifth century BCE atop a hill in Athens. The site includes the Propylaia, the Erechtheion, the Temple of Athena Nike, and the Parthenon—a temple to the goddess Athena. “The Parthenon is rightly famous, although it is one of the most enigmatic and strange Greek temples ever built,” says Dr. Paga. “Almost every element of the Parthenon is ‘weird.’” For example, the structure features eight Doric columns along the front, while the majority of Greek temples only had six columns on the short end. It also includes an Ionic frieze (despite its Doric columns) as well as a back room. Additionally, Dr. Paga says that despite the Parthenon’s lasting legacy, the Erechtheion was actually the most important building to the Greeks at the time.

Temple of Zeus at Olympia
Photo: Thomas Faull/Getty Images
2/5
Temple of Zeus at Olympia
Located at the home of the Olympic games, Dr. Paga says this temple is a fairly “standard” example of Greek design, though built on a much larger scale than others.

This image may contain Architecture Building Human Person Temple Shrine Worship Parthenon Column Pillar and Grass
Photo: Antonio Capone/Getty Images
3/5
Temple of Neptune
The ancient city of Paestum, or Poseidonia, which was founded on the coast of Southern Italy around 600 BCE, is home to a number of well-preserved Doric temples, including the Temple of Hera, the Temple of Athena, and a second Temple of Hera (also called the Temple of Neptune or Poseidon), seen above.

Image may contain Outdoors and Nature
Photo: Walter Bibikow/Getty Images
4/5
Temple of Apollo
Located at the lower slope of Greece’s Mount Parnassus, the sanctuary of Delphi was one of the most important places in the ancient world. The site comprises the Temple of Apollo, constructed in 510 BCE; the Athenian Treasury; the Sanctuary of Athena Pronaia, which includes the circular Tholos; a theater; and a gymnasium.

This image may contain Animal Reptile Dinosaur Building Architecture and Bird
Photo: Katja Kreder/Getty Images
5/5
Terrace of the Naxian Lions
In Greek mythology, the island of Delos was the birthplace of the gods Apollo and Artemis. The ancient commercial center was notable for its elaborate homes, the Temple of Apollo, and the Terrace of the Naxian Lions.

