Ancient Egyptian architecture

Ancient Egyptian architecture, the architectural monuments were produced mainly during the dynastic periods of the first three millennia BC in the Nile valley regions of Egypt and Nubia. The architecture, similar to representational art, aimed to preserve forms and conventions that were held to reflect the perfection of the world at the primordial moment of creation and to embody the correct relationship between humankind, the king, and the pantheon of the gods. For this reason, both Egyptian art and architecture appear outwardly resistant to development and the exercise of individual artistic judgment, but Egyptian artisans of every historical period found different solutions for the conceptual challenges posed to them.

Dynastic Egypt
Any survey of Egyptian architecture is weighted in favor of funerary and religious buildings, partly because of their location. Many temples and tombs survived. They were built on ground unaffected by the Nile flood, whereas most ancient Egyptian towns were lost because they were situated in the cultivated and flooded area of the Nile Valley. Yet the dry, hot climate of Egypt allowed some mud brick structures to survive where they have escaped the destructive effects of water or humans.

Al-Jizah. Giza Necropolis, Giza Plateau, Cairo, Egypt. Side view of Sphinx with the Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops) rising in the background. The sides of all three of the Giza pyramids are astronomically oriented to be north-south, east-west (see notes)
Britannica Quiz
Pop Quiz: 18 Things to Know About Ancient Egypt
The two principal building materials used in ancient Egypt were unbaked mud brick and stone. From the Old Kingdom (c. 2575–2130 BC) onward, stone was generally used for tombs—the eternal dwellings of the dead—and for temples—the eternal houses of the gods. Mud brick remained the domestic material, used even for royal palaces; it was also used for fortresses, the great walls of temple precincts and towns, and subsidiary buildings in temple complexes.

Tombs
Mortuary architecture in Egypt was highly developed and often grandiose. Most tombs comprised two principal parts, the burial chamber (the tomb proper) and the chapel, in which offerings for the deceased could be made. In royal burials, the chapel rapidly developed into a mortuary temple, which, beginning in the New Kingdom (c. 1539–1075 BCE), was usually built separately and at some distance from the tomb. In the following discussion, funerary temples built separately will be covered with temples in general and not as part of the funerary complex.

Mastabas were the standard type of tomb in the earliest dynasties. These flat-roofed, rectangular superstructures had sides constructed at first from mud brick and later of stone, in the form of paneled niches painted white and decorated with elaborate “matting” designs. They were built over many storage chambers stocked with food and equipment for the deceased, who lay in a rectangular burial chamber below ground.

In the great cemeteries of the Old Kingdom, changes in size, internal arrangements, and groupings of the burials of nobles indicate the vicissitudes of nonroyal posthumous expectations. In the 3rd dynasty at Ṣaqqārah the most important private burials were at some distance from the step pyramids of Djoser and Sekhemkhet. Their large mastabas incorporated offering niches as well as corridors that could accommodate paintings of equipment for the afterlife and recesses to hold sculptures of the deceased owner. By the later Old Kingdom, internal space in mastabas became more complex as they accommodated more burials. In the mastaba of Mereruka, a vizier of Teti, first king of the 6th dynasty, there were 21 rooms for his own funerary purposes, with six for his wife and five for his son.


Step Pyramid of Djoser
The tomb for Djoser, the second king of the 3rd dynasty, began as a mastaba and was gradually expanded to become a step pyramid. It was built within a vast enclosure on a commanding site at Ṣaqqārah, the necropolis overlooking the city of Memphis. The high royal official Imhotep was credited with the design and with the decision to use quarried stone. This first essay in stone is remarkable for its design of six superposed stages of diminishing size. It also has a huge enclosure (1,784 by 909 feet [544 by 277 meters]) that is surrounded by a paneled wall faced with fine limestone and contains a series of “mock” buildings (stone walls filled with rubble, gravel, or sand) that probably represent structures associated with the heraldic shrines of predynastic Egypt. At Djoser’s precinct, the Egyptian stonemasons made their earliest architectural innovations, using stone to reproduce the forms of predynastic wood and brick buildings. The columns in the entrance corridor resemble bundled reeds, while engaged columns in other areas of the precinct have capitals resembling papyrus blossoms. In parts of the subterranean complexes, fine reliefs of the king and elaborate wall panels in glazed tiles are among the innovations found in this remarkable monument.


For the Old Kingdom the most characteristic form of tomb building was the true pyramid, the finest examples of which are the pyramids at Al-Jīzah (Giza), notably the Great Pyramid of King Khufu (Cheops) of the 4th dynasty. The form itself reached its maturity in the reign of Snefru, father of Khufu, who constructed three pyramids, one of which is known as the Bent Pyramid due to its double slope. Subsequently only the pyramid of Khafre (Chephren), Khufu’s successor, approached the size and perfection of the Great Pyramid. The simple measurements of the Great Pyramid indicate very adequately its scale, monumentality, and precision: its sides are 755.43 feet (230.26 meters; north), 756.08 feet (230.45 meters; south), 755.88 feet (230.39 meters; east), 755.77 feet (230.36 meters; west); its orientation on the cardinal points is almost exact; its height upon completion was 481.4 feet (146.7 meters); and its area at the base is just over 13 acres (5.3 hectares). The core is formed of huge limestone blocks, once covered by a casing of dressed limestone. Other features in its construction contribute substantially to its remarkable character: the lofty, corbeled Grand Gallery and the King’s Chamber—built entirely of granite—with five relieving compartments (empty rooms for reducing pressure) above.

The pyramids built for the later kings of the Old Kingdom and most kings of the Middle Kingdom (c. 1938–1630 BC) were comparatively smaller in size and not as well constructed. The tomb of King Mentuhotep II of the 11th dynasty is, however, of exceptional interest. Its essential components were a rectangular structure, terraced porticoes, a series of pillared ambulatories, an open court, and a hypostyle hall tucked into the cliffs. (See discussion below.)

The monumentality of the pyramid made it not only a potent symbol of royal power but also an obvious target for tomb robbers. During the New Kingdom, the wish to halt the looting and desecration of royal tombs led to their being sited together in a remote valley at Thebes, dominated by a peak that itself resembled a pyramid. There, in the Valley of the Kings, tombs were carved deep into the limestone with no outward structure. These rock-cut tombs had been constructed for private citizens as early as the 4th dynasty. Most were fairly simple single chambers serving all the functions of the multiplicity of rooms in a mastaba. Some, however, were excavated with considerable architectural pretensions. At Aswān huge halls, often connecting to form labyrinthine complexes, were partly formal, with columns carefully cut from the rock, and partly rough-hewn. Chapels with false doors were carved out within the halls. In some cases the facades were monumental, with porticoes and inscriptions.

At Beni Hasan the local nobles during the Middle Kingdom cut large and precise tomb chambers in the limestone cliffs. Architectural features—columns, barrel roofs, and porticoes, all carved from the rock—provided fine settings for painted mural decorations. The tomb of Khnumhotep is an outstanding example of fine design impeccably executed.

The earliest royal tombs in the Valley of Kings were entirely hidden from view; those of the Ramessid period (19th and 20th dynasties) are marked only by a doorway carved in the rock face. They had no identical plan, but most consisted of a series of corridors opening out at intervals to form rooms and ending in a large burial chamber deep in the mountain, where the massive granite sarcophagus rested on the floor. Religious and funerary hieroglyphic texts and pictures covered the walls of the tomb from end to end. The finest of the tombs is that of Seti I, the second king of the 19th dynasty; it extends 328 feet (100 meters) into the mountain and contains a spectacular burial chamber, the barrel-shaped roof of which represents the vault of heaven.

After the abandonment of the valley at the end of the 20th dynasty, kings of the subsequent two dynasties were buried in very simple tombs within the temple enclosure of the delta city of Tanis. No later royal tombs were identified in Egypt proper.

Domestic architecture
Mud brick and wood were the standard materials for houses and palaces throughout the Dynastic period; stone was used occasionally for such architectural elements as doorjambs, lintels, column bases, and windows.

The best-preserved private houses are those of modest size in the workmen’s village of Dayr al-Madīnah. Exceptional in that they were built of stone, they typically had three or four rooms, comprising a master bedroom, a reception room, a cellar for storage, and a kitchen open to the sky; accommodation on the roof, reached by a stair, completed the plan. Similar domestic arrangements are known from the workmen’s village at Kabun.

Villas for important officials in Akhenaton’s city of Tell el-Amarna were large and finely decorated with brightly painted murals. The house of the vizier Nakht had at least 30 rooms, including separate apartments for the master, his family, and his guests. Such houses had bathrooms and lavatories. The ceilings of large rooms were supported by painted wooden pillars, and there may have been further rooms above. Where space was restricted (as in Thebes), houses of several stories were built. Tomb scenes that show such houses also demonstrate that windows were placed high to reduce sunlight and that hooded vents on roofs were used to catch the breeze.

Palaces, as far as can be judged from remains at Thebes and Tell el-Amarna, were vast, rambling magnified versions of Nakht’s villa, with broad halls, harem suites, kitchen areas, and wide courts. At Tell el-Amarna some monumental formality was introduced in the form of porticoes, colonnades, and statuary. Lavish use was made of mural and floor decoration in which floral and animal themes predominated.

Greco-Roman Egypt
After the conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great, the independent rule of pharaohs in the strict sense came to an end. Under the Ptolemies, whose rule followed Alexander’s, profound changes took place in art and architecture.

The most lasting impression of the new period is made by its architectural legacy. Although very little survives of important funerary architecture, there is a group of tombs at Tunah al-Jabal of unusual form and great importance. Most interesting is the tomb of Petosiris, high priest of Thoth in nearby Hermopolis Magna in the late 4th century BCE. It is in the form of a small temple with a pillared portico, elaborate column capitals, and a large forecourt. In its mural decorations a strong Greek influence merges with the traditional Egyptian modes of expression.

A boom in temple building followed the establishment of the Ptolemaic regime. At Dandarah, Esna, Idfū, Kawm Umbū (Kôm Ombo), and Philae the Egyptian cult temple can be studied better than at almost any earlier temple. Though erected by the Macedonian rulers of Egypt, these late temples employ purely Egyptian architectural conventions but include flourishes that appear only in the Ptolemaic period, such as pillars in the shape of colossal sistra (a percussion instrument), Composite capitals with elaborate floral forms, monumental screen walls, and subterranean crypts. The temple of Horus at Idfū is the most complete, displaying all the essential elements of the classical Egyptian temple, but for exploitation of setting and richness of detail it is difficult to fault the temples of Philae and Kawm Umbū, in particular.

